---
layout: post
title:  "Early Thoughts On JavaScript and Front End"
date:   2016-05-13 14:25:00
categories: jekyll update
---
Hey there, long time no post (sorry, I’ve really fallen behind on this.) So as it stands, I’ve currently finished the first quarter of programming bootcamp (focused largely on Ruby on Rails) and have now moved on to front-end, which contains a mixture of HTML/CSS (though I’d done some of that already,) Javascript, and various JS related tools and libraries (jQuery most notably.) While not unlike with my time spent working with Ruby and Rails (discussed in my first post,) I do find the sheer amount of tools and material overwhelming and am once again saddled with a terrible case of “[Imposter Syndrome].” However, in the same respect there seems to be no end of solutions to these problems that one can find online. I’ve let this blog sit idle for a little while because I felt I didn’t have the “knowledge” to write about specific programming tools or concepts, nor was I particularly inspired by any code-related “issues” lately either. However, in an effort to stay focused, I figure I can at least “journal” and keep my imaginary audience up-to-date on my studies. So, while I’m by no means an expert on any of the subjects in the front end course yet (nor am I really in the world of Ruby/Rails either), I guess I can toss out a few first impressions of my understanding of the world of front-end stuff. 

First and foremost, as I was warned, Javascript is, without a doubt, notably uglier than Ruby. In retrospect, (though it may have not made sense to go this route for a myriad of other reasons,) it might have be nicer to start with JS before moving onto Ruby (*Ruby is higher-level, right?*) so I might better appreciate how elegant Ruby is rather than appreciating it retroactively as I struggle to remember additional bits of syntax that are required in Javascript (and a number of other languages if I recall correctly) that Ruby manages to avoid. I think there’s more depth to this ugliness than I can appreciate at my current experience level, but even the little things like constantly having to drop semicolons and preface so many things with “var” can be mildly annoying when you’re not used to it. Looking back, I also enjoyed the wealth of methods prewritten into Ruby on various class types that basically let you do *.obviouscoolthing*, *.wellnamedfunction*, or *.thankgodthisexistshowcoulditnotbeinjstoo* on all manner of strings, arrays, and classes. Also the symbol thing was pretty great too.

However, what I will say is, in the same regard as my amateurish-skill-level makes trivial things seem annoying, I will also say that as a total neophyte, I don’t (*in the grand scheme of things, anyway*) see a whole lot of *real* difference. In the end the general means (whatever they are called and whatever syntax is required to do them,) to solve problems remains remarkably similar. This may appear that way to me due to a lack of true-pragmatic-work-experience or simply a lack of depth of understanding, but for now, I’m not really bothered by whatever additional hiccups are thrown at me via this new language. Perhaps it’s rooted in ignorance, but I do find it somewhat empowering to realize that syntax is just that, and once learned to a basic level, the same logical tools that served you in one language, still serve you in others. Whatever level of capabilities I have (*or don’t*) it’s nice to know that they largely seem to carry over. To be frank, if I was lucky enough to have a job coding at this point, I wouldn’t really if I was asked to work largely in Ruby or Javascript, I’d just be happy to be working. The comfort and skill-level I'd want with either language largely come with time and practice.

In any case, that’s probably all I’ve got for now, I’ll try to start throwing in some more physical samples of code soon and keep up with this. Next, I hope to talk about my experiences with jQuery and its advantages/shortcomings next.


[Imposter Syndrome]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impostor_syndrome
