---
layout: post
title:  "Bernie Brogrammers?"
date:   2016-03-30
categories: Bernie Sanders, elections, programming, campaigning
---

So I’m going to write an article that’s at least in part about politics, and focuses on certain aspects of Bernie Sanders’s campaign. Your personal opinion and politics aren’t relevant, you don’t have to like or support him to take this article into consideration, and hopefully, you don’t even have to be politically-inclined. Obviously I’m fan, (that’s how I know about this,) but I don’t expect you to be, and that’s not really important to this discussion either.

I don’t know exactly when I noticed it, but the giveaways probably occurred on his unofficial reddit sub ([r/SandersForPresident]). People had realized (if not earlier) after the polling done on the first debate, that Bernie had most of his support (and more support than any other candidate in either party) coming from online communities that didn’t rely on traditional news outlets or media sources to get their news. However, while the average supporter might vote in an online poll on CNN, share a link on facebook, or tweet one of the various cheesy hashtags his youthful supporters have coined for him,  his diehard fanbase lurks on the reddit sub, many of whom might seem to be heavyweights in the greater reddit community. (My evidence for this is After his surprise effective tie in Iowa and big victory in New Hampshire, in both cases 5-7 out of the top r/all posts were Bernie Sanders related links that came from his unofficial sub.) That’s not really important though, young people own the internet, and that’s where most of his support is, so none of this is really surprising.

It was around the upset of the Michigan primary that I really started to notice the number of tools his supporters (who I’ve now learned are disproportionally coders,) had put into play, which if not totally effective, were very interesting new tools for voter outreach and encouraging a culture of activism and volunteerism, (particularly since I was discovering them at the same time I was enrolled in an online coding bootcamp.)
So while debate may exist about how well organized-or-not the Sanders campaign actually is. It’s hard to deny how much his organization is buttressed by independent volunteers and unofficial groups (usually for the better, occasionally for the worse.) For example, while Bernie’s campaign (not unlike others) provides links and instructions and some basic tools to phonebank different states for GOTV and registration drives (not to mention their own slack channel with directions and discussions), it has made the process much more interesting, powerful, and fun, with all the tools provided by those unofficially associated with his campaign. For example, the  [berniepb] site, is a tool that allows more effective tracking of phonebanking, as well as a few competitive games to keep volunteers motivated and amused while they trudge through the largely frustrating and unrewarding task of calling random strangers and asking about their voting intentions. The website offers a free download of a google chrome extension that works in synch with the campaign's dialer and tracks your calls. It allows you to see not only your own records of calls, but also the total calls made on a given day, the accumulated calls for each state (during said phonebook drive,) both which are both associated with specific goals. It also provides various rewards/honors/acknowledgements for the top callers and allows you and a friend to play a competitive head-to-head phone banking game. Personally, what I find perhaps most interesting is the map at the bottom of the page that tracks where said calls are coming from and going to. (It was particularly fun to watch before the second Super Tuesday, where it looked like some sort of apocalyptic situation room mapping of incoming missile strikes - see it for yourself on a busier night.)

Of course it’s not just the phone banking tool. Most campaign experts will tell you that any remote contact to voters is a distant (but pragmatically necessary) second to actual door-knocking, or “canvassing” as it’s called. I’ve tried it once (drove to Youngstown OH the day before the primary and discovered that not unlike phone banking this is also difficult and frustrating as well.) It’s particularly difficult when the city or neighborhood one is working in isn’t laid out in a dense metropolitan-style grid-system and it becomes even more difficult when trying to compare the list of targeted addresses with a marked map to plan the most effective route across the 50 or so houses you’re likely to target in a single outing. Now while I don’t know if it’s really fully functional or synched with all or any of the campaign, the IOS app "[Field The Bern]" is a particularly amazing idea. Aside from providing instructions on how to canvass and quickly access policy information, it provides very valuable mapping information and directions (via your smartphone), as well as making the process of coding (entering and recording) voter responses (a major roadblock to the efficiency and accuracy of both canvassing and phonebanking) a lot easier. Plus, (like everything else) there’s a competitive game you can play against all your other weird diehard political friends. To be honest I’m not sure to exactly what degree the offical campaign is utilizing the app and it’s data (they certainly weren’t when I was out, though they probably should have been) but while it says at the bottom of the site it says “Paid for by Bernie 2016” the tag line “not the billionaires” has been replaced with “made with love by volunteers.”

However these tools are all assistance to previously existing campaign methods, and require substantial time investment for volunteers, (not to mention the awkwardness of actually speaking to strangers.) While Sanders may have mountains of internet support, I think it’s safe to say among the 200,000+ [r/SandersForPresident] subscribers, it’s unlikely that much more than 1% of them actually engage in this sort of volunteering. What’s perhaps more impressive is they seem to have created a completely new system of outreach, which appears to rely on little more than Facebook’s API. The process started with a tool called [berniefriendfinder], which allowed Facebook users to search for either their own, (*or more importantly,*) their "friends of friends" by specific state, as long as they  had “liked” either of the two main Sanders Facebook pages. It also came equipped with a fairly standard message you could send out to all the people you found, (reminding them to register, vote, or provide information about polling places and other needed services.)

Regardless, by modern internet standards, this was a rather slow and laborious process. Moreover messages from friends of friends apparently appear in a separate inbox on one's Facebook page, and are likely be ignored if seen at all. The next step implemented by the volunteer-coding-activists, was to create “public” events which would contain all the same (and more) information as the original messages, but allow users to contact more people at once, and via a more visible method. This system was relatively short lived (as it was soon replaced by private events, which I’ll explain in a moment,) but it introduced a tiny little app called the “[Event Invitation Bookmark].” As a user, all you had to do was drag the link into your bookmarks tab so you could easily click on it later. Because Facebook prevents friends-of-friends from inviting each other to public events, the strategy at the time was to use the friend finder mentioned above, scroll down to the bottom until Facebook stopped loading people who met the "friend-of-friend/likes-sanders/by-specific-state criteria," then click on the little Event Invitation Bookmark button...and... **BAM!** ...you had now a pop up from which you could copy however many hundred names with the fb tagging "@" symbol in front of them. All that was left was to post a link to the event, copy the names and scroll through each of them with your keypad to activate the tagged-links. Now everyone on your had found could see the event.

It didn't end there though, this method was still fairly obnoxious, ugly, and easy to ignore. The solution they provided was to allow those who wanted to get involved in facebanking to directly friend-request a handful of volunteer organizers, who would in turn accept the request then immediately invite the user to various private-event pages that had been created for each state’s primary. At this point a user was now part of a *private* event, which Facebook allows you to invite friends of friends (a choice on their part I don’t understand), and the Invitation Bookmark tool was modified now to grab their names invisibly, providing only an alert about the number of names that it had grabbed. When the button was clicked again while the invite to event pop-up was open, the names would suddenly be added. At this point it, now took a matter of *minutes* to reach *hundreds* of potential voters. There were/are still numerous issues, as Facebook caps the number of invites per day at 300, and any single person’s invites to one event at 500.  (I for example in PA and NY have between 1-2.5k friends of friends who have liked a Bernie page, and I imagine it's only a matter of time before Facebook cracks down on this.) Still regardless of flaws, as someone who just happened to be working on a project to utilize basic API and who didn't really understand why everyone said it was **so** important, this was a shocking and exciting lesson.

After pointing out all this, (and there’s a ton of other silly apps with less political action associated I could mention,) it’s fair to note that there has been a pretty large component of tech-savvy Sanders-supporting-coders (*Bernie-Brogrammers anyone?*) One might wonder why so many people, who likely have pretty good jobs with pretty good incomes and benefits might support someone who favors a somewhat more progressive tax structure, free-public-college, and universal healthcare, but that’s a discussion for a very different blog. I know it’s a phenomenon, because in fact, they have their own subreddit as well [r/codersforsaders]. It is interesting to note, despite the candidate’s populism and that much of this is volunteer work as labor-of-love, very little (if any) of this code is open source. I’m not sure if this do to with pride, the desire to prevent opponents supporters from creating their own versions of this software, or perhaps that, despite it all, some activists may be looking (reasonably) for some personal profit from these tools after the end of the campaign. If not any of that, than perhaps they’re looking for work as coders in the political realm, or simply hoping to have a voice in shaping the methods of campaigning in future elections.

One thing is clear, while tools like facebanking may still have limited effect (there’s some debate over what roll it played in the historic upset of the Michigan democratic primary,) the youth vote, while notoriously inactive and uninformed, will continue to play a larger and larger role. Sanders currently takes the under-30 crowd by absurdly high margins, and while only some small percentage of this age group is active in politics, voting tends to increase as people age, and Millennials now outnumber Baby-Boomers. While their politics may or may not change as they get older, it’s highly unlikely that their dependence on social media and the rest of the internet will. Beyond its merits, while one may debate the effect this campaign will have on the Democratic Party or the future of it’s platforms, I feel much more confident to say, that while it may exist only in the background right now, it will shape future campaigning methods. Like it or not, the old means of voter outreach, (like everything else that is old,) is dying out, and coders will play a larger and larger role in upcoming elections.

[r/SandersForPresident]: https://www.reddit.com/r/SandersForPresident/
[berniepb]: https://www.berniepb.com/
[Field The Bern]: https://fieldthebern.com/
[berniefriendfinder]: http://www.berniefriendfinder.com/
[r/codersforsaders]: https://www.reddit.com/r/CodersForSanders
[Event Invitation Bookmark]: http://feelthebern.events/
